# A Machine Learning Analysis of Classroom Management and Student Behavior Ratings on Students’ Academic Engagement

An R script that includes machine learning approach using a principal component analysis (PCA) and 10-fold cross-validation logistic regression model with automatic feature selection was used to examine how classroom management and behavior rating variables predict student engagement. 

The script reads in three datasets worth of teacher, classroom, and student data. The data was collected from a project aimed to evaluate the effectiveness of a comprehensive intervention combining classroom management strategies, self-evaluation activities, and academic tutoring on teacher and student behaviors. The larger study included a total of 436 students identified as displaying severe challenging behavior in the school setting and 260 1st-6th grade general and special education teachers. Within this study, both students and teachers were observed prior to randomization to intervention or control groups. Pre-intervention (time point 1) data are the only data examined within this analysis. These data represent teachers' natural rates of classroom management practices and students corresponding natural rates of engagement. This analysis includes 294 students.

There are multiple datasets used in this analysis: the Systematic Direct Observation (SDO) dataset, the Classroom Atmosphere Rating Scale (CARS) dataset, and a dataset that includes 3 different behavioral rating measures. The Systematic Direct Observation dataset includes student engagement (the outcome variable) and multiple individual, specific teacher practices (predictor variables).The Classroom Atmosphere Rating Scale (CARS) dataset includes 6 items from a questionnaire that observers use to rate general classroom factors related to classroom management, student behavior, and teacher practices. All of the items are scored on a 1-5 scale, 1 representing very high and 5 representing very low. Lower scores are associated with better classroom atmospheres (e.g., students showing interest in classroom activities, students are following posted rules) and higher scores are associated with poorer classroom atmosphere (e.g., students appear uninterested, students are not following posted rules). The Student Behavioral Ratings dataset includes 3 different measures all focused on rating students' challenging behavior including: **Social Skills Rating System (SSRS), Systematic Screening for Behavior Disorders (SSBD), and the Teacher's Report Form (TRF). 

Data is not included on this repo due to teacher and student privacy but it can potentially be made available upon request. 
